---
layout: post
title:  "Will the USWNT Win Back-to-Back World Cups?"
author: [ audrey ]
categories: [ News ]
image: assets/images/articles_2024/edition_1/USWNT-world-cup.png
---

The United States Women’s National Soccer Team, USWNT, is known for its arrogant, powerful, and suave air. You either love them or you hate them.  Captain Becky Sauerbrunn leads some of the most skilled women in the world, including 2019 bronze boot winner Rose Lavelle, 2019 golden boot winner Megan Rapinoe, and the famous Alex Morgan. In 2019, they took the eighth Women’s World Cup by storm and quickly rose to the top of the soccer world. Since their successful run, they have faced immense competition. At the 2021 Olympics, the USWNT placed third, losing to Sweden by 3 goals to nil and tying Australia in the group stages. In November of 2022, for the first time in 29 years, they lost 3 games in a row. The most recent camp roster looks unidentifiable from the 2019 World Cup roster, as head coach Vlato Andonoski has invited younger players, hoping to shake the squad up. With the world watching, can the USWNT redeem themselves and return to the pinnacle of soccer?

This is not the first time the USWNT has faced adversity. For as long as there has been a women’s soccer program in the United States, there has been a pattern of underpayment and underfunding. In March 2019, the women’s players filed a lawsuit against the U.S. Soccer Federation. According to Matt Bonesteel of the Washington Post, “The players accuse the national federation of paying lower salaries to women and subjecting them to more dangerous playing conditions than their male counterparts, and they ask for nearly $67 million in back pay and compensation.” After a glorious win in the 2019 World Cup, “Equal Pay! Equal Pay!” was a favorite chant amongst the crowd. Finally, on September 7, 2022, they “reached a $24 million settlement with U.S. Soccer in February, which included back pay for previous World Cup prize money and a commitment that the men and women players would receive equal pay rates on all fronts” (Cohen). As equal pay is a large step forward for women’s sports everywhere, did the USWNT do as well as they did in 2019 because of their hunger for equality?

On July 30th, 2019, after winning 2 World Cups, the record-breaking head coach Jill Ellis announced her retirement from the position. Three months later, a replacement  was announced in Vlatko Andonovski. Andonovski was named as the new coach just nine months before the 2021 Olympics, bringing his potential success into question.. Would he be able to bring home gold? Would he live up to the legendary career of Jill Ellis? On the pitch, the USWNT finished 3rd in the 2020 Olympics. In October 2022, the women’s team suffered back-to-back losses for the first time since 2017. The roster had been constantly changing, and there was little to no chemistry between the players on the pitch. Eden Laase from Just Women’s Sports states “Rodman got her second start against Spain, but was subbed out at halftime before the pair could get anything going. And when Rodman went out, Ashley Hatch came in. Those two are an elite duo for the Washington Spirit, so why not test how they would play together on the national team? Andonovski, though, rarely has done so” (Laase). 
The roster is not looking its strongest either. It is filled with young, raw talent, like 17-year-old Alyssa Thompson, who is still easing her way onto the field. Her speed and skills are a good addition to the team, but will her lack of experience hold her back? Additionally, during the most recent match against Ireland, Mallory Pugh tore her patella tendon and underwent surgery. She was a crucial factor in the USWNT's success and  often scored every game. Thankfully, power-house midfielder Julie Ertz is back, after taking off 2 years to care for her baby. She is a true adrenaline boost to the team and brings the much-needed hunger that so many new players are missing. 

Overall, the USWNT is not the favorite in the upcoming World Cup.. Without a doubt, it will certainly be a highly-competitive tournament, with many countries eyeing the golden trophy.. Personally, I believe that England or Australia will come out victorious. They are both extremely talented and dangerous in the final third of the pitch. You can watch the World Cup on FOX Sports, HBO MAX, Peacock, and more. I am excited to see how the events of the 2023 Women’s World Cup in New Zealand and Australia will unfold. Will the USWNT come out victorious and continue their domination or will someone else break the streak and take gold? 

Works Cited

Bonesteel, Matt. “A Timeline of the U.S. Women's Soccer Team's Equal Pay Dispute with U.S. Soccer.” The Washington Post, WP Company, 23 Feb. 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/2022/02/22/uswnt-pay-lawsuit-timeline/. 
Cohen, Li. “U.S. Women's National Soccer Team Formally Signs Years-in-the-Making Equal Pay Deal after Defeating Nigeria in Friendly.” CBS News, CBS Interactive, 7 Sept. 2022, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/uswnt-formally-signs-equal-pay-deal-soccer/.    


