---
layout: post
title:  "Intro to Quantum Mechanics"
author: [ sara, harsh ]
categories: [ Science ]
image: assets/images/jan/SaraSchwartz_HarshShetty-IntrotoQuantumMechanics-1.jpg
tags: []
---

Classical mechanics has been the dominant way that the universe has been understood for centuries. Explanations for macroscopic phenomena were easily explained through the laws that were originally thought to govern every part of the universe. However, with advancements in our ability to interact and observe at the microscopic level, discrepancies have begun to surface. Scientists theorized that a new set of laws— the laws of quantum mechanics— could explain the behavior and nature of subatomic particles, such as protons, neutrons, electrons, and photons.

Physicists theorized in the 1800s that electrons have fixed orbits around the nucleus of the atom. Their energy is absorbed and emitted in units called quanta. When an electron gets excited or de-excited, it will leap from one orbit to another without inhabiting the space in between. This is how scientists can predict the likelihood of the location of an electron based on how much energy is being absorbed or emitted. Similar explanations were made to understand what light and a photon were. Light is defined as a particle when traveling through space or any void, since, by definition, waves cannot travel through space. However, certain properties of light exhibited wave-like qualities. Christian Huygens, in opposition to Newton’s notion that light was a particle, came up with a set of principles, known as the Huygens’ Principles, stating that light came from a specific wave source and explained the interactions between light and a barrier.

The famous double-slit experiment shows that particles can also behave like waves using those same principles. A macroscopic version of this experiment has, at the front, a machine that shoots out tennis balls in random places. At the back, a detector that can record where the tennis balls land can be found. In between these two parts, there is a barrier with two open rectangular slits. After shooting many tennis balls, the detector shows that the tennis balls have only landed directly behind the two slits in the barrier. If this experiment was done at the subatomic level with electrons instead of tennis balls, the result would not be the same. When scientists tried this, the detector showed a pattern of electrons in narrow strips all the way across, mostly in the space behind the middle of the two slits. This is called the interference pattern, created by the interactions of waves. When researchers turned cameras toward the electrons to observe this behavior, the electrons exhibited particle-like behavior and the two direct lines proved this. This held true when testing for other subatomic particles such as photons, which was originally tested by Thomas Young in 1801.

Another example of this can be seen by using polarized lenses. Polarized lenses contain long chains of parallel molecules that only allow wavelengths that follow the opposite orientation of the chain to pass through (horizontal wavelengths pass through vertically aligned chained molecules). In contrast, any molecule that is in line with the chains is completely absorbed. However, when the wavelength is in between being completely parallel or perpendicular to the lens, there is a probabilistic chance that it will snap to either being fully parallel (completely absorbed) or perpendicular (passing through completely but in a new orientation). To completely block out light, two lenses can be placed in line with each other, with one being perpendicular to the other. Oddly, due to the properties mentioned before, an additional lens added in between them at an angle would allow light to pass through again despite there being additional barriers for the light to travel through. (You can try this at home if you have 3 sets of polarized lenses!).

Many ideas have come from these basic observations of the subatomic particles. The Superposition Principle states that when an electron is not being recorded or measured, it will be in all the possible positions it could be in at the same time. The act of measuring makes the superposition collapse and the electron chooses just one state to be in. This is why the electrons’ wave function collapsed and they chose one state to be in when the scientists put the cameras on, erasing all evidence of the superposition. This can be visualized by the famous Schrodinger’s Cat thought experiment. Erwin Schrodinger placed a healthy cat in a covered box with a radioactive sample that had a 50% chance of killing and decaying the cat. Until the box is opened and the cat is observed, we have no idea if the cat is alive or dead. If the cat were similar to an electron, we would say that before opening the box, the cat was both alive and dead at the same time because it was in all the states it could possibly be in.

In addition, due to the ability of a particle to be able to snap into a position when observed, theories have arisen on what occurs with the other states. The Many Worlds Theory states that anything that can happen does happen. If electrons were being observed with cameras on, meaning that the superposition would collapse, they would choose a different state to be in in each world. In World A, they would collapse to position A, but in World B, they would collapse to position B. Different worlds will observe different results so that all possible collapsed positions will be observed in at least one world. Every time there is more than one possible outcome for the universe, it splits and creates several copies in which all possible outcomes come true. There could be a world in which the Europeans never found the Americas or a world in which humankind has achieved immortality.

Electrons have a unique property that no two electrons of an atom can share the same quantum numbers. When two electrons share the same shell, subshell, and orbital, the only remaining characteristic that can separate the two is the spin. Quantum entanglement is when two particles become connected so that the properties of one are opposite to the other. One property they have is spin, a quantum form of angular momentum, and each particle can be spin-up or spin-down. When not observed, both particles in the entanglement have the superposition of being both spin-up and spin-down at the same time. However, when even one particle is measured, it will collapse to one spin direction, and the other particle will instantaneously collapse to the opposite spin direction. This suggests that the entangled particles can communicate at a speed faster than light. Einstein did not believe this explanation and instead suggested his own theory that the spin states of each particle were predetermined based on what direction they were being observed from, and therefore no communication was occurring between the two particles. He said that at the point of entanglement, it was decided which state each particle would have, and there were no superpositions. However, mind-boggling as it may seem, experiments proved consistent with the quantum mechanics theory and Einstein was proved incorrect.

Principles of quantum mechanics have proven so reliable and consistent in experiments that we cannot ignore them, and thus have been used in the development of lasers and the integrated circuit as examples. Quantum mechanics can greatly improve the efficiency and degree of new technologies that society can produce in the future. If scientists can harness the ability of particles to be in so many positions at once, that means that several technological processes can be carried out at the same time, exponentially decreasing computer processing time. Classical computers rely on binary digits— bits, that are either 0 or 1; however, quantum computers use quantum bits, qubits, that can have a superposition of 0 and 1, increasing the amount of data that can be stored and used. Currently, computers with this technology have 100 qubits that stay at a near-zero temperature to avoid any interference from magnetic or electric sources.

In addition, we can use the principles of quantum entanglement to teleport particles over long distances. Let’s say Particles X and Y are entangled, and we want to teleport Particle Z. Particle Z will interact with Particle X so that Particle X will record all the information on the quantum state of Particle Z. This information is then sent to Particle Y, which is manipulated and becomes an exact copy of Particle Z. The original Particle Z is then destroyed as its quantum information has been extracted. Scientists have been able to teleport particles, but humans have so many particles that it would take trillions of years to do.

Quantum mechanics is a relatively new branch of physics that still needs to be understood. Discoveries about it happen frequently with new properties and theories emerging that could provide benefits to society. Hybrid quantum computing, a combination of classical methods and quantum computing, has already proven valuable in boosting efficiencies of optimizing algorithms and allows for better encryption. With simulations and machine learning being greatly approved with current hybrid computing, one thing is certain: quantum mechanics will be the foundation for future civilizations.

---

# References

Astrum. (2023, June 15). *The Attribute of Light Science Still Can’t Explain*. Youtube. [https://youtu.be/TfwaEhNg9Oc?si=aQboMISsl9tUaaas](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://youtu.be/TfwaEhNg9Oc?si%3DaQboMISsl9tUaaas&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1704138413461407&usg=AOvVaw1ZRLWMFl38FsLpq5jotWlx) 

California Institute of Technology. (2023). *What Is Quantum Computing?* Caltech Science Exchange. [https://scienceexchange.caltech.edu/topics/quantum-science-explained/quantum-computing-computers](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://scienceexchange.caltech.edu/topics/quantum-science-explained/quantum-computing-computers&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1704138413462083&usg=AOvVaw0M_UqYn7vbHM6AoAqyNX0I) 

CrashCourse. (2017a, March 3). *Quantum Mechanics - Part 1: Crash Course Physics #43*. YouTube. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7kb1VT0J3DE&t=1s&pp=ygUecXVhbnR1bSBtZWNoYW5pY3MgZnIgYmVnaW5uZXJz](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3D7kb1VT0J3DE%26t%3D1s%26pp%3DygUecXVhbnR1bSBtZWNoYW5pY3MgZnIgYmVnaW5uZXJz&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1704138413462441&usg=AOvVaw1HDMJpTs5rokNzT-0pIyqk) 

CrashCourse. (2017, March 9). *Quantum Mechanics - Part 2: Crash Course Physics #44*. YouTube. [https://youtu.be/qO\_W70VegbQ?si=Fo0FKitz7rotCzBj](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://youtu.be/qO_W70VegbQ?si%3DFo0FKitz7rotCzBj&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1704138413462773&usg=AOvVaw1XSLa0cwB4R20eCHAAXsrQ) 

LondonCityGirl. (2015, May 14). *Quantum Mechanics for Dummies*. YouTube. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JP9KP-fwFhk&pp=ygUecXVhbnR1bSBtZWNoYW5pY3MgZnIgYmVnaW5uZXJz](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DJP9KP-fwFhk%26pp%3DygUecXVhbnR1bSBtZWNoYW5pY3MgZnIgYmVnaW5uZXJz&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1704138413463152&usg=AOvVaw0uldLJQ5XEklgLGzGBe406) 

Morin, D. (2018). *Introduction to Quantum Mechanics*. In Harvard Scholars. [https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/david-morin/files/waves\_quantum.pdf](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/david-morin/files/waves_quantum.pdf&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1704138413463602&usg=AOvVaw0LBYTe7CWg-J1qQ3v7rrma) 

